cc fundamentals
os
network security
vulnerability management
incidence response
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cybersecurity is the practice of defending computers, servers, mobile devices, 
networks, and data from malicious attacks. It involves tools, processes and 
best practices to ensure a system's security.

Importance?
-Protects sensitive data (personal, financial, healthcare)
-Ensures business continuity and minimizes downtime.
-Safeguards against financial and reputational damage.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The CIA Triad is a foundational model in CS, consisting of three principles:

Confidentiality - Ensures that information is accessible only to those authorised
to see it. 
Example is encrypting files to prevent unauthorized access.
Tools used are AES(Advanced Encryption Standard), TLS(Transport Layer Security)
-authentication, who are you (access control)
-authorization, what are you allowed to do (encryption)

Integrity - Ensure information is accurate and has not been tampered with.
Example is to use hashing algorithms to detect file changes.
Tools are Checksums and Digital Signatures.
- make sure data is true to itself. (digital signature)

Availability - Ensure Authorized users can access information when needed.
Example is to implement backups and redundancy(creating duplicates of
components or systems to ensure ALTERNATIVE RESOURCES are always available).
Tools are RAID(Redundant Array of Independent Disks), load balancers.
-resources available only to authorized users 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THREATS
A threat is a potential cause of harm to systems or data.

Types of Threats:
External Threats - eg.Hackers, malware, ransomware, phishing.
Internal Threats - eg.Employees misusing access, accidental data leaks.
Physical Threats - eg.Theft of devices, damage to hardware.

Malware - "Malicious software" is any program or code that is created with
the intent to do harm to a computer network or server. Malware is the most
common cyber attack, because it encompasses many subsets that leverage 
software in a malicious way.(ransomeware, trojan, worms)

Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks - a targeted attack that floods a network 
with false requests in order to disrupt business operations. on these attacked
systems, users are unable to access websites or emails or online accounts etc.
This costs the organisation time, money and other resources.
#(Distributed)DDoS attacks are launched from multiple systems. Much more difficult
to catch.

Phishing - a type of attack that uses email, sms, phone, social media and 
social engineering techniques to entice a victim to share sensitive information
such as passwords or account numbers, or trick them into downloading malware.

Spoofing - a technique through which attacker disguise themselves as
a known or trusted source. In doing so, the attacker is able to engage 
with the target and access their systems or devices with the ultimate goal
of stealing information, extorting money or installing malware.

Indentity-based attacks - extremely hard to detect. Once a valid user's credentials
have been compromised and the attacker is pretending to be them, it is difficult
to pick up any red flags.

Code injection attacks - injecting malicious code into a vulnerable computer or
network to change its actions. (SQL injections, XSS)

Supply chain attacks - an attack that targets third party vendor who offers 
services or software that is vital to the supply chain. vulnerable because modern
software is not written from scratch, but involves many off-the-shelf components
like APIs, open source code etc.

Social engineering attacks - a technique where attackers use psychological tactics
to manipulate people into taking desired action.

Insider Threats - are internal actors such as current or former employees that pose
danger to an organisation because they have direct access to the company network,
sensitive data and IP, as well as business processes, policies etc.

DNS(domain name system) tunneling - a type of attack that leverages DNS queries and
and responses to bypass traditional security measures and transmit data and code 
within the network. Once infected, the hacker can freely engage in 
command-and-control activities. This tunnel gives the hacker a route to 
unleash malware and/or extract data,IP or other sensitive information by encoding it
bit by bit in a series of DNS responses. ready simple to deploy, since 
tunneling toolkits are readily accessible online.

IoT-based attacks - any attack that targets an IoT device or network. 
Once compromised, the hacker can assume control of the device, steal data,
or join a group of infected devices to create a botnet, which can then launch a
DDoS attack.

AI-powered attacks - as AI and ML technology improves, the number of use cases has
also increased. Just as we can leverage AI and ML to protect, attackers can us it
to attack.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

VULNERABILITIES
Vulnerablilities are weaknesses that attackers exploit to gain unauthorised access.

Types of vulnerabilities

Misconfigurations - the largest threat to both cloud and app security.
Many security tools require manual configuration. This process is prone to 
human error and takes alot of time to manage and update.

Unsecured APIs(Application Programming interfaces) - one of the few 
organizational assets with a public IP address. If not properly secured, the can
become easy targets for attackers to breach. Also prone to human error

Outdated or unpatched software - Software vendor periodically release 
application updates to add features or patch security vulnerabilities.
Unpatched and outdated software make it easier for advanced attackers to target.
network and endpoints are also vulnerable.

Zero-day vulnerabilities - refers to a security flaw that has been discovered by a 
threat actor but is unknown to the enterprise and the software vendor. The term 
"Zero-day" is used because the software vendor had "0" days to work on a patch or
update to fix the issue, meanwhile it is a known vulnerability to the attacker.

Weak or Stolen User Credentials - Many users fail to create unique and 
strong passwords for each of their accounts. Weak credentials are
most often exploited in brute force attacks when a threat actor
tries to gain unauthorized access to data and systems by trying many combinations
of usernames and passwords.

Access Control - Companies often grant employees more access and permissions than 
needed to perform their job functions. This increase risk of identity-based threats.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

RISK MANAGEMENT

Risk management involves identifying, assessing and mitigating risks to minimize
harm.

Steps in Risk Management

Identify risks: What could go wrong? (eg. data breach, system failure).
Assess risks: Determine the impact and likelihood of each risk.
Mitigate risks: Apply controls to reduce risks.

Risk Example
A stolen laptop could lead to data loss.
Mitigation: Encrypt the hardrive and use strong passwords.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cybersecurity Domains

Cybersecurity covers multiple domains:

Network security - Securing networks from intrusions.
Application security - Ensuring software is free from VULNERABILITIES
Information security - Protectinf sensitive data.
Incident Response -  Detecting and Responding to breaches
Operational Security - Managing access controls and system policies.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
key security controls:
-administrative: policies, employee training
-physical: locks, badges, surveillance
-technical: firewalls, encryption
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

TCP/IP: Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
UDP: User Datagram Protocol

osi model has 7 layers
tcp/ip model has 4 layers

OSI model layers:
7. Application layer
6. Presentation layer
5. Session layer
4. Transport layer
3. Network layer
2. Data Link layer
1. Physical layer

TCP/IP model layers:
4. Application layer
3. Transport layer
2. Internet layer
1. Link layer/Network Access layer


#Explaining OSI layers:
1.physical layer;
- no address type
- devices: Cables, Network Cards, Hubs
- Data Type: Bits

2.data link layer;
-Address type: MAC Address
-Devices: Switches /Bridges
-Data type: Ethernet Frame (ethernet header, IP header, TCP header, data payload, ethernet trailer)

3.network layer;
-address type: IP Address
-Devices: Routers, Firewalls
-Data Type: Packet (IP header, TCP header, data payload)

4.transport layer;
-address type: Ports
-Devices: Routers,Firewalls
-data type: segments (TCP header, data payload)

5.session layer;
-managing sessions(session start and closed out, authentication and authorization)

6.presentation layer;
-Data translation, formatting, encryption, compression

7.application layer;
- has to do with how data shows up in UI that we interact with and how we input data

what is a port?
a port is an entry point -  like a doorway that can open and close

what is a protocol?
an established set of rules for network communications to work. each protocol has its own purpose.

some protocols---
IP(Internet Protocol)- about getting the address the data should go to.
TCP(Transmission Control Protocol)- enables application programs and computer devices to exchange messages.
UDP(User Datagram Protocol)- enables comms with low latency and loss tolerance. No acknowledgement needed. Used for treaming like netflix.





MSRA Microsoft Remote Assistance - get access to a remote user's desktop
no firewall or port forwarding required
user makes a request-sends an invit
techician connects-uses the password in the request
replaced by Quick Assist

find text in file?
linux command -grep- command to find text
windows command -wingrep
manual(view docs for command) eg. man grep
grep something(text in file) system.log(file name)

copy file?
cp(to copy file)
cp system.log(file to copy from) system.log.backup(file to paste to)
ls(list files specified) -la system.log


authenticate to wireless network using windows credentials?

cyber security is the protection of information in a system against malicious attacks
NIST national Institution of standards technology

no way to completely eradicate risk, only mitigate.

cyber security focus area: Network security

principles
defense in depth - not relying on 1 defense mechanism (avoid single point of failure)
least privilege - only certain authorizations
seperation of duties - no single point of control or
security by design - security should not be an afterthought. implement from design to completion
Keep It Simple Stupid - dont make it harder than necessary. secure but simple as possible.

Never do this!! **security by obscurity**

interview questions
What is on your home network?
-be technical.
Difference between threat, vulnerability, risk?
-vulnerability is a weakness in the system
-threat is a negative event
-risk is likelyhood of vulnerability being exploited by the threat
How would you go about securing a server? (open ended question, knowledge check)
-check CIS benchmarks for own personal server, guidlelines controls depending on what the server is used for.
Why is DNS monitoring important?
